m0_introduction/README.md, before:

# 1️⃣ Introduction
Hello there!  
If you are reading this you might have been enticed by promises of performance and other
some such advanced black magic, but first, a digression...

There are so many things to keep track of as a modern day programmer and most systems hide these things from the user.
You call something called... ```?numba?``` and annotate a few functions and it magically makes your code faster.
You use something called ```?Py?...?Torch?...``` and it seems really slow for some reason.
You're sure you have a GPU in your machine, but it's still slow.
```PyTorch``` has something called a profiler, but you don't know how it works and you don't
know what the hell ```DtoHMemCpy``` even is.
It can be hard to reason about what is going on inside these black boxes.
On top of that you might not be able to find anything to walk you through all of the
stuff you don't know that you don't know.
As scary as it can sometimes seem to get your hands dirty and take on what might
seem an insurmountable obstacle, not doing so can have consequences.

The speed of execution of a program is approximately correlated to the energy consumption of that program.
Until we use 100% green, renewable, energy in all of computing we have a shared responsibility to at the very least
practice some modicum of restraint and sensibility in our resource consumption. Taken to the limit by putting
large scale machine learning, with its
[massive energy consumption](https://towardsdatascience.com/chatgpts-electricity-consumption-7873483feac4)
for both training and inference, in
everything without necessarily generating value comensurate to the expended resources is an
[irresponsible use of resources](https://towardsdatascience.com/environmental-impact-of-ubiquitous-generative-ai-9e061bac6800).

<figure markdown>
![Image](../figures/chatgpt-is-so.jpg){ width="500" }
<figcaption>
<a href="https://makeameme.org/meme/chatgpt-is-so"> Image credit </a>
</figcaption>
</figure>

If someone trains a deep learning model for two weeks on eight huge data center GPUs in a cluster, it is their
responsibility that that training process is fairly well optimized, and that all data is responsibly retrieved,
such that that training does not have to run again because of sloppiness.

And thus stops the finger pointing!

Optimizing code, especially on systems you might share with others both means that you can get your results faster,
but that others can have use of the system in a reasonable time as well.
If you are creating large models, optimizing them to be smaller or more efficient also results in entities with profits less
than the GDP of a small nation actually being able to train and run inference with your model,
increasing the democratization of your work and its reach. If its able to run on a consumer grade desktop - even better!

This guide was made to be an iterative process, taking you by the hand,
speaking to you at the level at which you are following it, trying not to overwhelm you.
Reading that back, it could sound a bit condescending, but it basically means that the
types of concepts you are assumed to know about will gradually increase with each level.  
Due to the guide gradually introducing certain concepts, jumping around the material
is not recommended.
I also acknowledge that some people have different interests.  
As such, some portions of the guide will be tailored to people who are into deep learning,
people who like computer vision, or computer graphics or other some such.  
You are more than welcome to read and do all of it, but no one says you have to do anything.  
If you just follow along the path that is most relevant to you, you will be just fine.  
The guide does contain code, sometimes just small snippets, but also frameworks in
which most of a module will take place.

Most importantly - Don't Panic! The guide is here for you! And now for something completely different... practicalities!

## 🧬 Specializations
Throughout the guide there are sections and exercises prefixed by 🧬. These exercises and topics
are meant to be up to you to follow. If you are mostly interested in deep learning, by all means
only read and do the sections and exercises which are relevant to deep learning. Which section and
exercise is relevant to which specialization will be explained in each section. To begin with
deep learning will be supported, but once a full first draft is ready, I will begin adding things relevant to
computer graphics, computer vision and cognitive signal processing.

## 1️⃣2️⃣3️⃣4️⃣5️⃣ Levels
The guide's way of doing things is to iteratively expand the curriculum and the depth
at which concepts are described. You can follow the guide iteratively by doing it
multiple times, each time advancing in level or you can jump right in to the relevant level.

### 1️⃣
This level is for people unsure about investing the time and effort to do level 2.
People are busy, and inherently looking to maximize the value gained given the time invested.
Just for those people, each module has been boiled down to approximately 2 pages of reading.
Reading all of the material should take at most an afternoon and is comprised of main page of each module.
Basically, you could stop reading once you are done with
the 1️⃣ header and just click each "MX - XXXX" on the left, read that page until the
end, then click on the next "MX - XXXX" title and read that until the end and you would be
done. That does not include "M5 - Projects", that one is only relevant for 3️⃣ and 4️⃣.
Happy reading!

### 2️⃣
At this level you might be a comfortable programmer in Python, you might be a researcher, or you might just be
warming up for level 3. In most cases you might not be all that comfortable with lower level languages, such as
C, C++ or Rust.
It is expected that you checkout the repository and try out the code on your own laptop.
It is expected that you might change a few variables here and there to explore the performance
benchmarks generated, but not much more than that.
Don't worry, it does not require an Nvidia GPU to run on your laptop.
There will be Rust code, 🦀, but it will be as simplified as possible to just
focus on making your learning experience as smooth as possible.
If you have a systems programming background or are experienced in C/C++/Rust, you should be able
to move through this level easily.
This level does not take into account any module, section, page or info box with a 3️⃣
or above in front of the name.
You are still welcome to read them of course, but
the language and code are a bit more advanced and it might be a bit too much if you are still working on the basics.

### 3️⃣
This level is made up of all the material from 1️⃣ and 2️⃣.
At this level it is expected that you have experience with C/C++/Rust and that you have tried
programming a GPU or that you have previously done level 2 and are up for a challenge.  
If you haven't done any of these things, you'll be ok, but it might take significant effort on your part.

### 4️⃣
At this level everything at 3️⃣ is expected, as well as you doing a handful of the exercises.
This is for doing a course version or if you REALLY want to learn all the guide has to offer.

### 5️⃣
The secret bonus level! It is the one where you do levels 1-4 and read all the further reading sections
(which are more academically rigorous). Typically these references will be to book chapters, university courses,
scientific papers and in-depth blog posts.

## 👨🏼‍💻
If you are a teacher who wants to make use of this material, feel free to use the
[course site](https://absorensen.github.io/real-time-visual-and-machine-learning-systems/).
The course focuses on teaching real-time systems for deep learners and visual systems programmers.  
It allocates half of 15 days to go through the material in the guide and the
other half to making a project relevant to the students' specialization, which is the contents of m5.  
It is designed to give shallow introductions to a wide range of concepts with a
handful of varying exercises.
The student is to then reach back and explore the topics relevant to their specialized
project in greater detail.
The breadth of topics is quite wide, and each student shouldn't be expected to
pass an exam in every topic.
In most cases they might remember that a thing exists and that they can search for it.
The thing they hopefully all learn is how to reason about performance, systems
design and that getting your hands dirty can be both fun and invigorating.

Commit message:

Change around the explanation of the levels and annotations

m0_introduction/README.md, after:

# 1️⃣ Introduction
Hello there!  
If you are reading this you might have been enticed by promises of performance and other
some such advanced black magic, but first, a digression...

There are so many things to keep track of as a modern day programmer and most systems hide these things from the user.
You call something called... ```?numba?``` and annotate a few functions and it magically makes your code faster.
You use something called ```?Py?...?Torch?...``` and it seems really slow for some reason.
You're sure you have a GPU in your machine, but it's still slow.
```PyTorch``` has something called a profiler, but you don't know how it works and you don't
know what the hell ```DtoHMemCpy``` even is.
It can be hard to reason about what is going on inside these black boxes.
On top of that you might not be able to find anything to walk you through all of the
stuff you don't know that you don't know.
As scary as it can sometimes seem to get your hands dirty and take on what might
seem an insurmountable obstacle, not doing so can have consequences.

The speed of execution of a program is approximately correlated to the energy consumption of that program.
Until we use 100% green, renewable, energy in all of computing we have a shared responsibility to at the very least
practice some modicum of restraint and sensibility in our resource consumption. Taken to the limit by putting
large scale machine learning, with its
[massive energy consumption](https://towardsdatascience.com/chatgpts-electricity-consumption-7873483feac4)
for both training and inference, in
everything without necessarily generating value comensurate to the expended resources is an
[irresponsible use of resources](https://towardsdatascience.com/environmental-impact-of-ubiquitous-generative-ai-9e061bac6800).

<figure markdown>
![Image](../figures/chatgpt-is-so.jpg){ width="500" }
<figcaption>
<a href="https://makeameme.org/meme/chatgpt-is-so"> Image credit </a>
</figcaption>
</figure>

If someone trains a deep learning model for two weeks on eight huge data center GPUs in a cluster, it is their
responsibility that that training process is fairly well optimized, and that all data is responsibly retrieved,
such that that training does not have to run again because of sloppiness.

And thus stops the finger pointing!

Optimizing code, especially on systems you might share with others both means that you can get your results faster,
but that others can have use of the system in a reasonable time as well.
If you are creating large models, optimizing them to be smaller or more efficient also results in entities with profits less
than the GDP of a small nation actually being able to train and run inference with your model,
increasing the democratization of your work and its reach. If its able to run on a consumer grade desktop - even better!

This guide was made to be an iterative process, taking you by the hand,
speaking to you at the level at which you are following it, trying not to overwhelm you.
Reading that back, it could sound a bit condescending, but it basically means that the
types of concepts you are assumed to know about will gradually increase with each level.  
Due to the guide gradually introducing certain concepts, jumping around the material
is not recommended.
I also acknowledge that some people have different interests.  
As such, some portions of the guide will be tailored to people who are into deep learning,
people who like computer vision, or computer graphics or other some such.  
You are more than welcome to read and do all of it, but no one says you have to do anything.  
If you just follow along the path that is most relevant to you, you will be just fine.  
The guide does contain code, sometimes just small snippets, but also frameworks in
which most of a module will take place.

Most importantly - Don't Panic! The guide is here for you! And now for something completely different... practicalities!

## Levels and Annotations
The guide's way of doing things is to iteratively expand the curriculum and the depth
at which concepts are described. You can follow the guide iteratively by doing it
multiple times, each time advancing in level or you can jump right in to the relevant level.

### 1️⃣
This level is for people unsure about investing the time and effort to do level 2.
People are busy, and inherently looking to maximize the value gained given the time invested.
Just for those people, each module has been boiled down to approximately 2 pages of reading.
Reading all of the material should take at most an afternoon and is comprised of main page of each module.
Basically, you could stop reading once you are done with
the 1️⃣ header and just click each "MX - XXXX" on the left, read that page until the
end, then click on the next "MX - XXXX" title and read that until the end and you would be
done. That does not include "M5 - Projects", that one is only relevant for 3️⃣ and 4️⃣.
Happy reading!

### 2️⃣
At this level you might be a comfortable programmer in Python, you might be a researcher, or you might just be
warming up for level 3. In most cases you might not be all that comfortable with lower level languages, such as
C, C++ or Rust.
It is expected that you checkout the repository and try out the code on your own laptop.
It is expected that you might change a few variables here and there to explore the performance
benchmarks generated, but not much more than that.
Don't worry, it does not require an Nvidia GPU to run on your laptop.
There will be Rust code, 🦀, but it will be as simplified as possible to just
focus on making your learning experience as smooth as possible.
If you have a systems programming background or are experienced in C/C++/Rust, you should be able
to move through this level easily.
This level does not take into account any module, section, page or info box with a 3️⃣
or above in front of the name.
You are still welcome to read them of course, but
the language and code are a bit more advanced and it might be a bit too much if you are still working on the basics.

### 3️⃣
This level is made up of all the material from 1️⃣ and 2️⃣.
At this level it is expected that you have experience with C/C++/Rust and that you have tried
programming a GPU or that you have previously done level 2 and are up for a challenge.  
If you haven't done any of these things, you'll be ok, but it might take significant effort on your part.

### 4️⃣
At this level everything at 3️⃣ is expected, as well as you doing a handful of the exercises.
This is for doing a course version or if you REALLY want to learn all the guide has to offer.

### Additional Reading
The secret bonus level! It is the one where you do levels 1-3, perhaps even do the exercises and then read
the "Additional Reading" sections at the bottom of select pages.
The references here will generally be more rigorous. Typically these references will be to book
chapters, university courses, scientific papers and in-depth blog posts.

### 🧬 Specializations
Throughout the guide there are sections and exercises prefixed by 🧬. These exercises and topics
are meant to be up to you to follow. If you are mostly interested in deep learning, by all means
only read and do the sections and exercises which are relevant to deep learning. Which section and
exercise is relevant to which specialization will be explained in each section. To begin with
deep learning will be supported, but once a full first draft is ready, I will begin adding things relevant to
computer graphics, computer vision and cognitive signal processing.

### 👨🏼‍💻
Sections indicated by 👨🏼‍💻 are recommended exercises if you want to really learn the topics in-depth or if you
are following a course based on the material.

If you are a teacher who wants to make use of this material, feel free to use the
[course site](https://absorensen.github.io/real-time-visual-and-machine-learning-systems/).
The course focuses on teaching real-time systems for deep learners and visual systems programmers.  
It allocates half of 15 days to go through the material in the guide and the
other half to making a project relevant to the students' specialization, which is the contents of m5.  
It is designed to give shallow introductions to a wide range of concepts with a
handful of varying exercises.
The student is to then reach back and explore the topics relevant to their specialized
project in greater detail.
The breadth of topics is quite wide, and each student shouldn't be expected to
pass an exam in every topic.
In most cases they might remember that a thing exists and that they can search for it.
The thing they hopefully all learn is how to reason about performance, systems
design and that getting your hands dirty can be both fun and invigorating.
